# GODIM

## Unity is Unreal

Unity is unreal. someone may say everything is dual, everything has a pair, a complementary. it can be called "duality principle" or "Dyad". one may think of world as a "Full binary tree" in which each node has a pair expect the root, which is called "God" or "Monad" or simply root. but there is a belief that even God has a pair, maybe called "Devil" or "Demon" or "Satan". but there is some contradictions. God have created Satan. but why? or if God and Satan are both creatures of same level who have created them? do god is complete, or need a complementary?  
all of these statements are vague and many of them doesn't have information or wisdom. this book doesn't have focus on philosophy, Monad, Dyad, imaginary concepts, God. this book mostly talk about human and life. the audience of this book is human. and the target of this book is to provide ideas that if human utilize, can live a good life, which is called happiness or contentment.  
don't worry. this book doesn't speak about complicated and philosophical concepts. it is way easier. this book is a relatively short and may look so simple and naive. at the end, someone doesn't need to be a Nobel Prize winner to find a way to live a good life.  
finding the way of a good life is responsibility of every one. this book only can guide you through the path and tell you that it is possible and not that hard. the hardest part is to unlearn beliefs, like the belief of living a good life is impossible or very hard.  
living a good life is the reason and purpose and objective of a human. helping human to find its way to live a good life is the reason and purpose and objective of this book.  
life is like a movie. movie is not meant to show protagonist become successful or hero or rich or win, it may but the purpose of movie is to be a good movie, narrate a good story. someone may be looking for meaning. a movie must not be meaningless, but showing a slice of life may have enough meaning and present a good movie. life doesn't need meaning since life is not meaningless at the first place. every living being must live its life and that's the purpose and meaning of life: To live. for human, it can live a good life or a bad life since it have free will.  
this book is a book of thought, concept, idea. it may be called logic or philosophy. this is not about history or religion or science. someone may be skeptical about some stories or scientific facts. there may be mistakes, but the historic and religious and scientific parts are only to convey the idea and are not point of focus, and are not meant to be reference.  
this book is not fixed and immutable, it is expected to change because it intended to be for all humans in all times. since human and life change by time, this book is expected to change by time too. have an eye on updates.  
it may be good to know mathematics, physics or biology or medicine to live a good life, but they are not necessary. this book only covers the necessary idea and knowledge for living a good life. for living a good life you need to know many things, like many things that are thought in school and many more.  
this book is intended to be read by every human, in every place and every time, so it is good to be accessible, readable, understandable, informative and acceptable for as many humans as possible. it is good to introduce this book to others, just like the believers that promote their believes.  
you may decide to abandon this book because of its opinion about believes, but it is extremely recommended to read and think about what you don't like and despise, since your growth is in it. reading and talking what you knew and accepted beforehand is waste.  
all statements of this book must be real, true, right (opposite of wrong) and unambiguous. some people think God is real, truth, right but since there is not a unique definition of God and there is no evidence of existence of God and there is no scientific experiments that shows what is God, where is God or how is God, so this book doesn't acknowledge the existence of a tangible existence called God, and consider it a taught and concept in human minds and also an imaginary being in stories. God is believed to be a supernatural existence, which it can't be neither proofed nor denied.  
it is logical to consider the probabily of facts that are still unknown. "aliens exists" is wrong, "aliens don't exist" is also wrong. since someone must search everywhere in the universe before claiming aliens don't exist. "there is no known sign of life in universe except earth yet" seems true.  
as you may have noticed so far, this book doesn't use gender-specific pronouns intentionally. also ommiting some of "the" articles is intentional.  

## Truth, Reality

you can jump form this section and read it later if you don't find it informative.  
what is truth? "true" means "Real". humans perceive the world with their senses. human can see an object and state that "I saw an object" which is a real and true statement. if that human also can touch that object by its body, human can say that "this object exists" or "this object is here" and these statements are real and true.  
sometimes a human see water in desert and say that "I see water there in the desert" but when human go there, see there is no water. because senses may have errors and mistakes. so the statement "I see water there in the desert" is somehow true because observer see something that resembles water in their eyes. but the true statement is that "I see something like water there in the desert", "I see mirage there in the desert". if human see mirage in the desert and say "There is water in the desert" it is false and unreal, and human can verify its falseness by going where it sees water.  
so the truth is reality, is what human can sense, but someone must be aware that it senses may have errors, and to ensure something is real and true, someone should verify that understanding with other senses.  
also there is another way to know something is real and true. humans can communicate with each other and verify their perceptions. for example a color-blind person may state that "object A and object B have the same color" but many other humans can tell that "object A and object B have different colors" so the color-blind human statement is false. the true version of that statement is "I'm color blinded, I see object A and object B have same colors".  
not all statements can be verified and evaluate by using one or more senses of one or more humans. like the statement "every material is built from atoms". no human can directly sense (see, touch) atoms. but there is some experiments which show maybe this statement is true. so for these kind of statements the true form is "it seems, every material is built from atoms".  
every statement about human history has probability or possibility of truth unless there is strong evidence about it. because every statement from every human can be true or false since human have an ability to tell the false statements called "lie". for example "airplane crushed to a building in New York in 2001" is truth because there was many people in the city and many videos are recorded. but "human landed on moon in 1969" is not necessarily truth because there is no strong evidence or many recordings. so the true and more accurate form of this statement is "probabily human landed on moon in 1969".  
to evaluate a statement, it must be clear and not vague and ambiguous. for example "God exists" is a vague statement because God is not a tangible and sensable existence, and it's concept and definision vary for humans. there is nothing called God that can be perceived by human using all of its senses. so God is not real, and "God exists" is unreal and false.  
someone may say that not all reality is perceivable by human senses. microbe is not observable and sensable normally. it is only possible with microscope. but with which scope or detector or receiver or experiment we can detect God? "God exist" may be true or false eqauly. it is like "maybe god exist or not". a half true half false statement has zero information and value.  
this book miserably try to evaluate the truth of God logically but beleive doesn't follow logic, do it? someone must unlearn and unbelieve first and look the world with a clear eye and think with a clear mind to be able to find a way to live a good life. there are many people around the world where they don't fill they are living a good life and wonder why, while they have believes and values that don't reflect relaity and are not valuable indeed. the only way to solve this contradiction is to unlearn belives. a very simple obsevation shows that in entire world, believers don't have better lives.  

## Human

What is human? human is species of animals. we can define human as a "living thing" but "living thing" is a vague concept. if we define living thing as an object that has DNA or RNA, it doesn't lead to a more clear definition. because DNA and RNA are molecules and are not directly sensible. also adding some DNA molecules to a pile of mud, doesn't make it a living creature. breathing or eating or reproducing are also hard to define and may also not be the precise boundary between living things and non-living things.  
one thing that seems to be the distinction between a living creature and a non-living creature is that a living creature have ability to continue and prolong its existence, which is called life. for example a stone don't move itself to a safer place where it is less likely to break or crumble or melt. but an animal can go where it can live, eat, be safe. or a tree grows roots toward water and branches toward light, and propagate its seeds that leads to creatures similar to itself. so the most distinction of a living creature is it's tendency to live and continue its life and existence.  
an animal is a living being that is made of bone, flesh and blood and can move by itself, breath, eat and reproduce. animals are various. a group of animals belongs to same species if the can reproduce a fertile child. so it seems that there is one known human species in the world since it seems different humans around the world with different appearances can mate and reproduce fertile children together.  
there is an obvious difference between human and other animals in the world, and it is not that humans can walk, talk, wear dresses, eat various types of food, eat cooked food, live all over the planet from poles to the equator. the difference is that human has self. human is known to have many features like intelligence, logic, awareness, self-awareness, mind, consciousness, conscience, psyche, soul, decision-making ability, language, emotion, love and other features. these features have a variety of definitions. some of them are vague and some are more clear. some of these features may be also present in some animals to some extent and some may be considered specific to human. also the amount and intensity and quality of these features vary between humans. some humans are considered more intelligent or logical than others.  
this book defines "Self" as the aware and controllable mind. other part of mind that is not in control of Self is called instinct, psyche or conscience. Self seems like an alien, a parasite or different creature from human or animal or every form of life.  
the source of life seems to be some big molecules called DNA or RNA. these molecules have an ability to recreate themselves and reproduce and also evolute. so it seems that in the past there was no life, then some simple forms of life appeared through reproduction and evolution and then these forms of life became more and more diverse and complex. currently there is millions of forms of life, like plants, animals, fishes, birds and other forms. apparently all or most of these forms of lives have lifespan, meaning a limited time after their creation, they die but during their lifespan they reproduce.  
maybe there can be existed some form of lives without DNA or RNA, some forms of life without reproduction or without dying or some non-binary forms of life. but on the earth in the recent millennials that some evidence are available, most of life forms have a binary sextual type. in this life forms, every species have 2 different types: male and female. a male and female reproduce via mixing their attributes and a new life born that is male or female. this process seems good and can satisfy the goal of a living form, that is to continue to live.  
this system of binary life has a feature that can adapt the life form with time and place (environment). every male or female have a kind of value system that evaluate everything specially the opposing sex, and choose a valuable one to mate and reproduce with it, and since the child have the attributes of the parents, the desired values of a life form that is in its mate may be present in the child. but first one living form must like and value itself to look for reproduction, since its child have also bears its attributes.  
human may feel this system inside itself. every male and female has a build-in value system that evaluate the other humans attributes. this value system seems working when a human says "I like this" or "this is beautiful". when human describes something as big or strong or tall or long, it can be measured and validated since these attributes are quantitative and measurable, but the beauty seems something that is not measurable, and also it is dependent and relative to the human.  
perception of beauty seems an unconscious evaluating system that differs between individuals, but not that much. perception of beauty seems a system that can evaluate the potential of life in a thing or being. when human see a natural landscape full of different forms of life, human evaluate scene as beautiful. also a jungle with various types of plants and animals seems more beautiful than a jungle full of only one type of plant. but if human see a scene full of corpses of animals and burnt land find it not beautiful. this is also applies to living things. lion seems more beautiful than a wildebeest. an eagle seems more beautiful than a vulture and a bee seems more beautiful than a cockroach.  
even considering that beauty is relative, most of the humans may find these statements true. this beauty evaluation is somehow aligned with the scientific importance of these living beings in natures and the impact of their life on the ecosystem, the collection of all life forms and their environment.  
even if human finds a living thing very ugly or disgusting, maybe eliminating that thing is good and help the life. human finds parasites, insects and sick living creatures ugly. but human must be aware that the beauty evaluating system in human have error like other perceptions and if science finds that an ugly creature is valuable for life, it seems better to follow the knowledge and science.  
in case of evaluating human beauty, human perceptions seems more relative, and a human must be more careful and cautious when evaluating human beauty. a human must not reject or resent an ugly person, and think its ugliness is bad and against life. because human has self. the beauty evaluating system seems to be a part of instinct, not Self. so humans may find a human ugly, but what they find ugly is the body. the self is not quickly observable. with knowing someone, you can evaluate its character, which is Self's appearance. if a human is ugly, it doesn't mean its existence is not good and doesn't enrich life. because it is possible that its self enrich life.  
the self and body seem connected and dependent. like if a human for a long time live in a society that does not respect it, may become hunchback. and one who  care for its body, may take respect from society. so the connections between body and self seems mutual and bidirectional. human also can change its appearance, like using dresses, putting cosmetics and doing surgeries and using prothesis or artificial parts.  
one important factor of self is its awareness and knowing and control over body. animals reproduce if they can find a mate and find food for themselves and the children. but human can measure the resources, the population and try to predict the future. one important and interesting thing is that when human compare its knowledge with past, can tell its knowledge seems evolving. but like human senses, knowledge may have errors too.  
one challenge for human is to maintain balance between its self and its instinct. some groups of people in history suggest that the good way of life if to suppress one of these human aspects and live with one of them as the main aspect. it seems that the source of many emotions are the instinct, like desire, lust, jealousy since they are not easily controllable by self. thus many groups suggest that human must suppress instinct and make self dominant. some humans find this way of life a good way of life but for most of the people it is not the best way of life, or even it is a bad life. it seems it is a bad idea since human self can't leave without a body and body, instinct, conscience, DNA. body is the vessel for a self to live. denial of body and instinct and psyche and conscience may lead severe conditions and ultimately to death.  
some may say that self is a soul and will deliver to God or other world or a spiritual space or reincarnate after the body dies but there is no evidence for these claims and human can't sense or scientifically evaluate these claims. also there is no known way to deny these claims. thus this is a statement that can not be evaluated as true or false and has no information in it, and we can call it absurd, story, fantasy, dream, superstition or assumption or whatever word you want to describe this.  
on the other hand someone may suggest that the good way of life is to live without Self and only with instinct. this way seems more practical because probably all other living forms except human have no Self, yet they continue their lives. also some may suspect that Self is a dangerous and somehow a bad being since it behaves like a parasite or virus. these are life forms and have life behavior in the sense of preserving their existence, protecting themselves, eating, and reproduction, but in long term some of them seize existence and life, not only their life but also other forms of life.  
apparently one of these life forms is called virus which is a parasite meaning it can't live by itself and must live inside another living being. but the problem is some viruses gradually kill their host and propagate to other hosts. this process may lead to death of both the virus and host.  
so human intensionally eliminate these life forms and don't try to preserve them and stop their extinction. but somehow human self have this behavior itself. human has extincted many life forms and has damaged environment and has propagated and filled the earth. but there is a subtle difference between human self and virus. unlike a virus or parasite that seemingly repeat its behavior until its elimination, human self can observe and understand and be aware of its behavior and change it.  
for many years humans created many explosives, atomic bombs, nuclear weapons, that they had the potential to seize life on the earth entirely. apparently even now this amount of explosion exists, but human is aware of this danger and know it threats entire life to create and hold this amount of explosives. wars also are bad for human lives and kill humans, but also it is bad for environment and earth and may cause issues for other life forms in the time of war and after that.  
one of the most important goals of this book is to spread this awareness to human Selves that they must value life and be aware of their odd behavior. self or consciousness is odd, and not unnatural since it is product of the nature, but it is singular and unique. Self was a very powerful result of evolution in human life form. human don't exactly know how and when the Self emerged, but it was defensively a great help to preserve human life form. now the human seems the most powerful and dominant form of life on earth, so powerful and dominant that can seize the existence of itself and all forms of life in a very short time, one day for example.  
human without Self doesn't seem to be able to survive. indeed human without Self is not easy to imagine and that's why it is called Self. there exist humans without language ability, logic and intelligence. these are called psychotic, crazy, mentally disabled or retarded humans. these humans typically can't survive and preserve their life and reproduce and live by themselves and need help of conscious humans. so human with only instinct and without self probability is not a life form that can preserve its life and soon will extinct.  
it is in some sense impoosible to elliminate Self willingly. Self have control over itself and body and instincts to some extent. Self can't stop heart or can't stop itslef, can't stop tinking, can't stop senses and perception. it can only ignore it and deny it to some extent and pretend that one human is like a dog, don't talk, don't wear dresses, eat leftovers for trash, but it have a hard time stop thinking about why it do this and is there a better life possible.  
indeed what human comprehends is Self, meaning the conscious part that has language, writing and reading ability and understand, not the human as a whole and the combination of Self, psyche, instinct and body. Self is like a driver and the human body and instinct seems like a car. so to live a good life human must preserve both self and instinct, and take good control of body and instincts and know it well can be abale to preserve, repair, tweak and strengthen it.  
body is a system that in the past century it is investigated scientifically and there is a good amount of knowledge to help preserve the body. this book is not meant to be a scientific book and leave the knowledge about good food, body movement and exercise, reproduction, healthcare and hormones and other topics to the scientific books but living a good life without knowing the science of body is not presumable.  
the psyche and neural system is a complicated part of body, seems to be the control system of body. the knowledge of psyche and neural system is relatively limited to the knowledge of body. but it is not less important, even more important than the health and fitness of body. it is harder to live a good life with a disordered psyche, compared to an unhealthy body. someone must pay attenstion to its psychological and nural health and fitness.  
body and instinct has a system of evaluation of events and things through senses. this system is supposed to help preserve life. like good smells indicate healthy and clean environment and things and bad smell indicates danger, infection, dirty and potentially unhealthy environment and materials.  
this book have focus on present (current time). human don't know when time began and when it ends. some scientists talk about millions and billions of years. that is so much bigger than the time periods one can perceive or imagine so they seem somehow meaningless. also this book have focus on earth and moon and sun and solar system. world and space is probably very bigger than what a human can sense from the size of the world. but outer spaces are very far and is not reachable by human in current time.  
to answer the question "how to live a good life", it doesn't seem relevant to think and know about far past, far future or far spaces. what happened several million years ago, what will happen in several million years later, when world created, when world will finish, is there any other habitable planet, the answer of these questions is typically very far from what is currently reachable by human. this book focuses on how to live a good life and finding a better planet to live or travel in time are not the feasible answers.  

## Good, Bad, Value

human self has a build-in value system which evaluate things and concepts as good and bad. also human have a build-in system of liking. human tends to like good and not like bad things. liking seems more relative to time and condition. one may say pizza is good but if eats pizza for 10 days in a row may feel doesn't like pizza anymore at that time.  
human self evaluation system seems connected to the instinct. human says pizza is good because it senses pleasure when eat it and then get energy and feel no problem digesting it. the pleasure during eating it is an indicator of positive pulses of body sensory that detect a beneficial meal.  
in past human groups and societies tried to create an artificial value system based on different methods like opinion of one human, an elite group or the majority of the people. the tendency to create and agree upon a value system and form a unity can be observed in known past human history. some of the oldest known writings and inscriptions are rules which reflect value systems. commandments of Moses consist of some rules that are like commands but indeed they are the definition of good and bad things, concepts, behaviors.  
when a rule says "human shall not commit homicide" it doesn't mean "human can not commit homicide". of course a human can commit homicide. the rule states that "homicide is bad".  
there were many humans that tried to develop a value system and publish their values as a rule book, religion, constitution. there were many wars like crusades, world wars, Vietnam War, Cold War, that seems their original cause and motivation is dominating a value system rather than obtaining land or wealth or goods, since their causalties and expenses are way more than their benefits and plunders.  
human intrinsic value system is unique for each person. but it is not that diverse and contradictory. most of the humans feel killing humans, stealing, lying, taking others freedom, are bad. the root of value systems may be seen in the life and human instinct and body. human is a living form and a living form wants to continue to live, in other words, for a living form life is good, is the value. so killing an individual from same species is against life, stealing their food or their goods rather than trying to obtain it is against life. some other concepts like lying and taking freedom is not related to other life forms except human. there is some values that are related to self not life of body.  
human self controls human body and instincts to some extent and try to meet its needs. but self seems an autonomous existence and even go so far to even take the life of its host body.  
self has some values that seems to have shaped through evolution like freedom, respect, fame, wealth and fortune, power (in the sense of social impact not physical body power), humility, shame and embarrassment, honesty, honor, jealousy, hypocrisy and many other concepts that seems only relate to human.  
it can be said that these values are more relative and varies between humans, groups and societies in different times. also in one human it may vary significantly through life. these observations suggest that the self values are less intrinsic and constant and more changeable and learnable and controllable.  
respect is considered one of most important human needs and values. it seems was useful in the groups of humans to live together. since living in a group was very important to be able to survive and respect is the value of an individual in group. so earning respect means securing life for oneself and its relatives and obtaining needs. now many humans still care about respect. but dramatic changes in societies specially modern cities, have impacted the value of respect. someone may live in a city and do a job without getting respect or considered a valuable individual in the society. getting respect from others seems a pleasure but someone also can learn to not care about others opinion and behave based on its values instead of getting its value from society.  
human can't survive alone normally, but it is becoming easier to live in a society without direct interaction with others and meet the needs with technological infrastructures. for example someone can work from home with the help of internet and get food with the help of a phone call or software and get the delivery via vehicles or drones that are not drove with humans. in this typle of life, respect and embaressment have less value compared to a vilage that people have enteractions regularily and need each other to live.  
fame, wealth and fortune, social power are some values that like respect provide a sense of security and ensures the providing of needs of an individual, but they are very relatives and varies between times and places. for example in some societies wealth considered valuable and good but in other societies wealth may consider bad because people may consider wealthy people corrupted, lewd and lustful.  

## Unlearn

who reads this book may be in any age and society with its value system. human may be atheist, Buddhist, christian, citizen, communist, fascist, Muslim, jew, anarchist or some of them at the same time. these are some sort of value systems which indicate what is good and what is bad commonly in forms of rule, regulation, commandment, instruction, advise, manifest.  
group of humans, as small as a couple or as large as entire world, feel a need to have an agreement upon a value system along with their communication system to be able to live a good life together. sometimes these values are assumed and not communicated and manifested, and sometimes it is written and tried to be precise.  
a family or clan may have some values like honesty, virtuous, modesty. these values commonly repeated in communications between members, and children grow rehearsing this values. a communist child raise communist and a Muslim child raise Muslim.  
these value systems resemble life forms, they try to preserve their life and reproduce and propagate themselves. also they are diverse and typically engage with each other to become dominant. this engagement is also similar to life forms, to preserve and promote the consistent and adaptable ones and demote and eliminate not-adaptable.  
but this value systems are artificial creatures and are not real life forms. one self can attach itself to a group of a value set and have a liking and fondness about the group and value set whether it is a religion, a country, a race, a football team or a celebrity fan group.  
a very important step one self must do to live a good life is to recognizes its artificial value set that are implanted inside it during its life, or have chosen itself, and try to know them, validate them, adapt them with its intrinsic values, remove those that don't like or don't find valuable and create new ones. this step can be called unlearn, that is to get rid of the values, rules and believes that are extrinsic and artificial.  
every group may claim that their values are the best values, their god or gods, religion, rituals, believes, rules, state, order, government, manifest is the best. but if someone look at all the times and places may find tha there is no best value system just like that there is no best living form. one may ask best in which quality? if it means best to live and continue life, all living forms are in continuous struggle to prove that their DNA is the best and more suitable to live. but many artificial value systems are not even created to promote the life and preserve it. many religions have value systems to promote after-life and promise heaven after death for righteous people.  
one example of this extrinsic and artificial values is to go to space to be an astronaut. space seems interesting for some people, but it is an empty dark place that there is no life in it. during the Cold War, there was a propaganda to explore the space. USA and USSR built many nuclear warheads and needed missiles to be able to nuke everywhere on the planet. so they invetigataed a massive amount of money on missiles and space projects and there was a propaganda in public broadcast about the value of the space exploration and astronots. this amount of advertisement brainwashed many people that space exploration is very important and valueable. this propaganda had a serious effect on children and many children wanted to be astronouts to be a valuable member of sciety and eran fame and fortune. the original and fundamental reason to promote the space exploration was not even developing the technology to create long range missles and mass morder humans. in the deeper layer it was a conflict between capitalism and individualism values against communism and socialism value system.  
the intensity of space propaganda and its effect on children was so severe that even after many decades of end of the Cold War and wasting many resources and money and even human lives for not an obvious valuable result, still there is many people that have a dream to go to the empty black space. it is understandable that some people may like adventure and exploration but Madagascar or even white nearly empy South Pole may be more interesting than the black completely empty space. the amount of interest that is observable in USA may raise a question that if space exploration is that interesting and valuable, why there is not that much passion and interest around the world? someone who is interested in space exploration must investigate its taughts to find the root of its interest, and see if it is original and belong to the Self, or it is because the people and media admires it.  
sticking to meeting the exterinsic values may lead to some sort of satisfaction but on the contrary someone may feel frustrated and disappointed that all of its efforts are for naught becuase Self will not sitisfy from meeting the values of others. Self is selfish.  
adapting the values of a group or society may be one Self's value, since it may seem safe and help live a good life to be a submissive and obeidant member of society but going too far to get killed in a space program or a war that someone don't know its reason defeats the purpose.  

## Think

one powerful tool that human possesses and can utilize to live a good life is thinking. even major part of this book that is meant to help humans live a good life are just thoughts, created by mind, not history, story, references, inspiration, oracle, revelation, vision. to find, understand, modify, even overcome the implanted values and find the original self values, someone needs to think a lot. thinking needs effort like exercising, but it is inevitable to live a good life. as a body needs regular physical activity to remain in form and healthy and functional, someone need to think regularly to maintain its mind healthy and functional.  
thinking is one of the two important tools that human can utilize to live a good life. the other is to love or feel sensation which is mysterious and out of scope of this book. people who don't think are idiot. typically an idiot can't live a good life but idiot may feel that it has a good life. but not only an idiot can't have a good life but also people that deal with it also suffer and can't have a good time dealing with idiot, especially if they are not idiots.  
one common misconception is that people may assume lower intelligence or IQ or brain power means idiocy, but it is not true. the idiocy is not the about the intelligence or brain power, it is about using it. brain is like muscle. different people have various bodies, some may be meager or sturdy. but when someone exercise regularly for a long time, no matter what how strong was its body, it can gain strength, while if someone don't move at all like a patient in coma for a long period, is can barely move its limbs. if someone think regularly it can strengthen its mind and someone that don't think become an idiot.  
the definition of thinking is an important consideration. imagination, fantasies, reviewing the past events or visioning dreams for future is not that type of thinking that lead to sanity and wisdom and avoid idiocy. human should think about himself, world, values and how to meet its needs. the most important thing to think about is how to meet the needs and reach the goals and what self likes. indeed the purpose of thinking ability is probably to help human live and continue life. but simultaneously, someone must investigate why it wants something, the roots of its desires. is what one wants is good? what is good?  
the purpose of this book is to help someone live a good life. but to find the way to live a good life is up to the one self and how someone can find a way to live a good life without thinking?  

## Diversity

unity is unreal. assume an entire world with one and only one living thing, for example a human, an immortal human. since there is not living form, assume it eats minerals to live. is this world beautiful or desirable? do you want to be this human? this is unity, but it is neither desirable nor even possible. now assume this human is not immortal but can reproduce itself when it wants, and its child is exactly the same human. it's still some sort of unity but still absurd. now assume child is not exactly the same and has some minor differences with parent. in this example, it is likely that it extinct soon since there is a change that the child be disordered and die before be able to reproduce. so this world is still nonsense. now assume this world has not one but many humans still without any other living forms. do you want to live in this world?  
the purpose of this example is to show how desire to unity and dominance in its extreme form is absurd. someone may think that the greatest goal of a living form is through a continuous struggle with other creatures, conquer all others and eliminate them and become dominant. but if you imagine that outcome, it is not desirable indeed.  
Diversity is part of life. life is not possible without diversity. the tree of life is a beautiful analogy. a tree has one trunk and many branches. the goal of a tree is not to reach and form a unity and intertangle and braid its branches like a rope and return to the original unity of its trunk or seed. the branches must have diversity and propagate and are not meant to reach one point and connect together again as goal, although they have one and are connected to one origin. this is the analogy of life. it may be from one origin, but it is not supposed to reach one goal or come back to its origin. the big bang is another example. assume world is created from explosion of a dense mass. it it supposed to come back to that dense mass again? it may come back to that state when it dies, but until it is alive, it moves and rotates and expands and grows.  
yet self may fill an urge to dominate and yearn for unity. every religion, country, philosophy and maybe individual may fill a desire to propagate and fill all the world and form a unity where everyone follow one rule, order, command, religion, school, establishment, philosophy, language or individual. some branches of Muslims believe someday Islam dominate the world and all humans become Muslim. many Japanese people are interested in "Sekai no seifuku" or conquer the world. during Cold War, the world was bipolar and each pole wanted to dominate the world and eliminate the other.  
unity is unreal, impossible, absurd, nonsense. unity is bad. unity is death. all living form unite in death so to seek unity is to seek death. just like a hero in a movie, does a movie can continue when hero defeats the villain? is it can be a good movie where villain form a unity with hero and all people live a peaceful life with consensus and unity, without opposition and diversity?  
this book wishes to help human find its way to live a good life but doesn't provide a way to live a good life. because there is not a single way to live a good life for all. every single living form have a build-in value system and guidance that tends to guide the creature to live.  
someone may say, to live a good life, smoeone shall not lie, someone shall not steal, someone shall not commit adultry. someone shall not commit homicide. there may be a consensus over last one. life is good and death is bad. but what if one self or psyche yearn for it? a few percent of people are psychopath, who may enjoy from homicide and harming others. scoiety will imprison and repress psychopaths and try to remove them from society and stop their harm. someone may ask is completely eliminating them is good? why evolutuon have created them? are them pure evil without any benefit? is it their presence may cause people be cautious and devise some preventions that are even useful in disasters and agians environment and animals and invaders? what about cancer? do it may have some benefits? it seems even death is bad, some creatures live to kill or cause harm, and they are product of nature themselves and do their assignment of life.  
human can think and inspect itself and world. does Self like to be strong or to be weak? do life implicate to be strong or weak? maybe to be strong is more likely to survive, but maybe a strong animal is a good prey for a hunter but a weak one can live without drawing attention. what about a human? is a weak human more likely to survive or a strong one? it depends on the time and place. in a harsh environment that human needs to do a lot of physical hard work to survive, strength is necessary. but in a developed society when people works with intellect or art, do strength needed? if a female psyche and unconsciousness likes a strong male to reproduce with, but self and counscious tells that strength is not needed and even is a waste of resourses, so what is good and bad? it seems good and bad is not absolute and permanent and vary between time and place and even individual.  
for a long time people talked about good and bad as absolute values but every single living being in its DNA carry its own unique values, and not only it is relative to the individual, but also it is relative to time and is not persistent. maybe a young female in a modern society finds weak males uninteresting but through time and deep thinking and experiencing, finds that it is ok for a man to be weak and female can reproduce with a weak male and expect it to be a suitable parent for the child.  

## Psyche
apparently there is not a consensus on the definition of Self, mind, intelligence, consciousness, unconsciousness, psyche, and some other related words. in this book, self refers to the part of being that one is aware of and can control. psyche is defined as part of mind that self can not control, also can be called subconsciousness, conscience, instinct, or include subconsciousness, conscience, instinct. the body control system or mind consists of self and psyche.  
it is possible to compare Self and psyche to parent and child. oneself need to be cautious of its psyche since it has an important role in living a good life, just like looking upon a child. having a healthy psyche is a requirement to live a good life. depression can be considered a psychic disorder since it is not in control of self and however self tries to feel good and console itself, it can't and the psyche yearns to seize the life. on the other hand if psyche is healthy and self think it is worthless and hopeless logically and there is no way to live a good life, it can not commit suicide easily because psyche don't understand this reasoning and is part of body and so crave to live and doesn't care much about Self.  
self must not forget that it is a means human utilize to survive and live. so self must serve the body and psyche and put the life its first priority. one common issue with self is that it can be selfish, ambitious, arrogant, greedy, perfectionist and forget its purpose. idiot Self may believe that will be immortal and delivered after death and get killed to earn honor but this Self is selfish and idiot because instead of serving its purpose to live, it wants to serve itself and earn honor and sacrifice its life. it may even convince and carry psyche down its path with itself.  
the analogy of parent and child for self and psyche is interested in the way that a parent must put its child first and give it priory because life implicate putting next generations prior to parents to preserve life.  
abundance, wealth, prosperity is growing in the modern era. in old times, human was in a constant struggle with nature to survive. self, logic, reasoning, calculations was not that strong among people. meeting basic needs demanded a lot of time and effort. people did chores, physical work, farming, hunting, building and crafting by hand. long time academic studying was not common. Self was not that involved and didn't play a main role in daily life. human was on autopilot mode and psyche took care of human most of the time.  
now Self has grown, and in some cases is overgrown. at the beginning, it was Self for life, now it is becoming Self for Self. it seems Self for Self is a disorder, it may resemble cancer. the problem with an overgrown Self is that may manipulate and overwrite its purpose. there is some old sayings that implies that it is good to know where one Self came from, why it came, where will it go. the philosophers always go too far and dismiss what is life. also religions typically focus on Self and promise eternal life for Self, as if the source of religions is a prominent or ambitious or greedy Self. someone must beware that Self can grow so that it doesn't fit in the body anymore.  
in the modern times there is some software programs that runs in a device but the control system of the software is in a remote system called server. if someone lose its device or its software, it can be restored on another device without losing data. someone may argue that human Self may be like this and can be restored after human's death. but still there is no evidence and proven scientific facts about it. so it is not rational to welcome death in the hope of after-life.  
someone may suggest that human must return to its old form of life to be able to leave a good life. it can be seen in biological field where they may say that the human societies and developments are not aligned with evolution result, and human DNA is not adapted to this lifestyle. but someone may argue that if human reproduce an old time situation like year 1000 AC, there is a high chance that it result in this situation again since it probably was a natural process and there was not an unknown almighty being's interference that can change the timeline with a different approach.  

## Eat

things that taste good indicate that they may be beneficial for the body, while body typically don't need the things that are bitter. but the senses are not that precise, and they error is common in senses. the knowledge probably is better indicator to help human live a good life. because the body don't adapt to the time and place quickly.  
in the past many humans needed to use their bodies to meet their needs, like building a house or farming. but in the modern era, humans use machines and use their body less while food is available. but their body and DNA is similar to past. so they still like sweet food and eat multiple times is a day because they get hungry and this causes obesity for many humans.  
obesity is considered a health problem. it is because of some problems like heart problems, diabetes, knee pain, back pain, etc. but the most important problem about the obesity for humans is that it considered ugly and not beauty. someone may ask why human find obesity ugly and not beautiful and the answer is that knowledge found that obesity is not good for health but human instinct have learnt that much sooner. so in the evaluating obesity, instinct and consciousness are aligned. but on the evaluating the valuable food, they are not completely aligned. the foods that are considered healthy and beneficial are not the most delicious foods that instinct likes and also eating a lot is not healthy while instinct likes it. so in these cases a human must control its instincts, not suppress it or unleash it and obey it, and this is called the balance.  
maintaining a balance between Self and body seems necessary to live a good life. sometimes human doesn't feel ok and yearn to eat or use something. there are some substances that are addictive and once human use them, feel pleasure and yearn to experience that feeling again. the most common cases are alcohol and cigarette. but from the past it is known that these substances are toxic and are not energetic or beneficial for body.  

## Kill

life is good and eliminating life is bad in general. so human must not kill any living being without a reason. but killing is a natural phenomenon that occurs in nature and not only it is not bad, but also it is good for a lion when it kills a wildebeest.  
every living creature eventually die so killing is changing the time of die. also all living beings reproduce so they replace died or killed individuals. but it doesn't mean killing is good. indeed killing is bad by itself. life is good and so every form of death can not be considered good by itself. but dying is part of life cycle and inevitable. if there were no dying by aging, population would grow and resources would come to an end and so individuals would die from starving, and if they also stopped reproduce, the evolution would stop. if there were no evolution, probably there were no human since human is the result of a long time of evolution of life. so dying is not bad and it is an inevitable part of life.  
but killing a living being may be worse than a normal die. if a living being get killed before puberty and reproduction its DNA vanishes from nature and life lose a potential future life form. nature have its own system of life, and it is working for a long time. many species emerged and lived, some are still living and some are extincted or evolved to a completely new forms.  
now human exist and it is conscious. so it can interfere and direct the life in nature. before human start to investigate the nature and life, it manipulated it. converted natural lands to farms, artificially selected species that was better for production of food and other goods and domesticated some species from plants and animals, and killed or eliminated species that were dangerous or harmful for human itself or its farm plants and crops and domesticated animals.  
this process may be considered natural, but it was not balanced since human was extremely superior to other species because of its intelligence. so human dominated all life forms on the earth. now human knows that it have cause extinction of many species and destroyed environment and ecosystem of many life forms and there are many endangered species. so human can interfere to the nature.  
the purpose of this book is to help human live a good life, and it is important to preserve the nature and the life forms to ensure a good life for humans of present and future.  
someone may argue that the other life forms are not important and a limited set of species are enough for human to live. but the current science shows that species have a complicated relation with each other and there is groups of humans and societies that were inattentive to the nature and destroyed nature and then faced some problems and disasters like floods or land-slides or decrease in fertility of lands.  
scientists have investigated the effect of different life forms on the human and nature and other life forms. this knowledge is continuously growing and humans must pay attention to these findings. it is not possible for every human to study all of scientific discoveries, but it is important to pay attention to scientists, and also it is important to dedicate some resources and have some humans to research the nature and environment.  
one consideration about killing is psyche. generally killing livestock and cattle is not against life since these animals are least endangered species, even they are most dominant and successful species, unless people suddenly stop eating meat and vegetarians become dominant. in that case they are in a great danger since they are not so fit to live in the wild.  
so killing livestock doesn't seem to harm life ar nature but there is something important about killing, it is that psyche is like a child and killing animals or even watching their death impacts the psyche. repeating this event may cause some impacts like tendency to violence or depression or abnormal fear of death. it may be better to kill animals without bloodshed or even without direct human interference.  

## Reproduction

human body follow the dominant pattern of reproduction and evolution system that currently seems the best system to preserve life and adapt to environment continuously.  
this reproduction system works with discriminating individuals into two types: male and female. for borning new individual, male must give a female half of its DNA and female mix half of its DNA with the male DNA and create a whole DNA set that grows to a new human which may be male or female itself.  
this process is not evident because human can't sense the detail of process, for example can't see the DNA or Cells or merging the DNA. but the scientific description of this process seems consistent with observations.  
attributes of parents is observable in children. one important attribute is tendency to reproduction and enjoying the process. body evaluate the reproduction as extremely good and reproduce the sense of pleasure to reward this behavior. it is because ancestors were probably those who were extremely interested to reproduction and have done it a lot and put current generations inherited their attributes, including the intense tendency to reproduce.  
it is many centuries that humans don't live wild. humans lived in families, clans, villages, cities, some kind of groups, big or small. this groups typically have some sort of rules for reproduction because bad system of reproductions lead to eliminating the group.  
one of oldest rules of reproduction was that a human must not reproduce with its relatives like parent, children, siblings, grandparents and grandchildren, siblings of parents and in some groups children of siblings of parents. in past humans knew that reproduction with relatives cause the disordered children. now there is scientific explanation why reproduction with relatives causes disordered children.  
the other important factor about choosing mate is psyche and conscience. it may have a strange impact on life if human mate and reproduce with relatives specially family members. also it may be strange to mate with a stranger, but it is how this system works. one benefit of mating with a stranger is that if they can't live together or don't like each other anymore they can separate, but mating with a relative and separating from relatives are not that good, since relatives typically support each other.  
human child need caring for long time to grow and reach puberty. this time varies between genders and individuals but it roughly 10 to 15 years. so groups developed rules to ensure the life of next generation of humans. loyalty and obligation of parents provides a better condition for children.  
one common rule in human groups was wedding and forming couple and family. some animals form a couple or family and some don't. human male is typically have stronger body and more capability of logic and calculations. also humans were faced with threats from other humans and other living forms and male is stronger and more capable to protect a group including females and children. so while male presence is not necessary for borning a child after female get pregnant, to ensure that child can survive its childhood period which is not capable of surviving alone, the presence of male was important. that seems the old reasons humans formed wedding ceremony and indeed it was effective and helped humans create stable societies and continue life.  
societies also disapprove and disdain and in some case dispel, suppress and eliminate humans that didn't follow this rule. a female doing reproduction behavior with multiple males, specially strangers for money or pleasure or other reasons than continuing life, was considered bad. it is because the pleasure is an evaluation system to help life continue. but if a human don't value life and misuse its body and seek pleasure without considering life, it is indeed cheating the system and may lead to elimination of its life. even if a female who had intercourse with multiple males, born a child, maybe the male parent is not known or even reachable and raising a child without a male may not be successful.  
putting aside the past and focusing on the present, there is a massive change in human life. now human can control pregnancy and examine parents of child. also many societies is considered safe and there is no need to a strong male to protect from threats. also females are able to do many jobs and provide the resources to live for one or more individuals. there is also some social systems that protect individuals from threats and sometimes provide resources to individuals that need resources to live. with this dramatic changes, the past rules of reproduction don't seem necessary or even useful.  
humans can cheat the body system of pleasure without considering it is an evolution system to encourage reproduction and continuing the life.  
animals typically do an effort to find a mate and reproduce. males of some species fight with each other to earn the chance of reproduction with females. this behavior is also present to some extent in human species. the body likes to reproduce itself. but human also have a self which can control body. a human likes to reproduce itself and see its existence continues in the future. but there is a problem. while human can reproduce body of itself with another human that likes, the self of the child doesn't seem to be the reproduction of the selves of its parents.  

## Children

animals tend to like children of animals even the child is not from its species or even the child is from a species that they hunt. this rule is not that general. some animal males kills children of their mates that are from other males, to reproduce their own offsprings. or some hunter animals may hunt the child animals if they can't hunt the stronger adults. but liking children is good because it is aligned with life continuation. when a hunter let a child of its hunt live, it secures its future and future of their children that they may find a hunt though it doesn't do it consciously and with scientific considerations.  
human also like children, human children and animal children. in the past humans tend to consider it very important to have descendants. every DNA seems to be unique and preserving every life form may be considered good and valuable for life but someone may argue that life is in motion, and it is not possible to preserve every DNA, and also it is not even valuable. because evolution choose better DNA constantly and not all DNA are good. so maybe it is not bad to eliminate some DNA forms or some individuals. the problem is that who can tell if a DNA is good or bad.  
to live a good life it is important to know that a human, like animals wants to have children and continue life, and its children are similar to it and inherit the attributes via DNA, but Self seems independent and human Self is more important than human body. parents must not try to form the Self as they wish and must respect the values of a Self despite that the Self is in their child's body, and they were born and raise the body.  
for animals, it is not beneficial to adopt a child of their own species or other species. maybe there is some animals that adopt a child to meet their parental instincts.  
in human this is different. humans typically live in a group with some rules. in the past it was common for children to care their parents when they get old. this one was one reason beside the instinct to have children. one other reason is that human groups typically have a value system and humans like to be normal. being normal is good, is best, because it is safest and ensure the continuation of life.  
if a human adopt a child instead of reproducing itself, it may be considered not good to eliminate its DNA unless in some special cases. one special case is that if the population have exceeded the stable amount, it may not be good to reproduce since the extra population itself become bad and lead to death in the populated species and other species in the environment. one other case it that for individuals that are not fertile and have disorders in reproduction system.  
abortion or eliminating human embryo before born doesn't seem to be good, since it is not aligned with preserving life. but it is different from killing a human. an embryo doesn't seem to have self and awareness and tendency to live itself. but it doesn't mean human is allowed to kill a life form with these properties. there must be a reason to abort a pregnancy and doing expulsion of fetus to consider it a good deed and not a bad act.  
if parent don't want the child, it may be a good reason to let the parent do an abortion since the child typically needs parent to care about it and raise it. so if parent don't want it, this may lead to a bad life for parent and child. someone may argue that maybe parent get interested in child after birth, but if we consider the opposite outcome, and think maybe parent never would want the child, it may be acceptable to abort the pregnancy.  
in human groups and societies child is considered belonging to both parents, male and female. fetus is typically carried by female, but it doesn't seem a good practice that letting only the carrier decide about fetus. so if the female parent doesn't want the child, still the male parent may want its offspring to live. so if the female don't want the child after birth, maybe the male parent can care about and raise the child.  
but if a female human don't want to continue pregnancy, though killing the fetus is not good, it doesn't seem forcing the human to carry the child is either good, because the female must carry and born child and if it doesn't want to do so, forcing human and taking its freedom and choice is worse. so a female must be free to abort its pregnancy and this act can be considered not bad.  
if the fetus is known to have disorder, it seems bad to bear a disordered life form and abortion in this case is good unless the situation is so severe that even a disordered life form can help the life to continue. now we are not low on human population, so there is no justification for borning a disordered child, and it is bad.  
psyche and our perception specially in subconscious must be considered in this case. but what must be a determinant factor is public and historic and religious considerations while it seems the main factor. human must understand that its population is more than an optimum, and it is hard to live a balanced life even in developed and modern countries, and so religious and cultural point of view about birth and reproduction is no more valid and good.  

## God

in Persian, the translation of equivalent word for god is self-come. and who is the self that come by itself except Self, except life?  
from the oldest known times, people tend to believe in a god or gods and worship them. but why? the exact reason is unknown but someone can guess that people needed rules and values and public agreements to live together, and an engraved stone and a kingdom with an army seems not the best way to form a society. without identity papers and verifications, surveillance systems and media, it was possible to some strong groups to do whatever they want, kill people and plunder their belonging and vanish in the wild. a male can go to its neighbor house, steal its belongigns or commit adultery with its female. a surveilance and juridical system, reward and punish system seems required.  
the belief system had some benefits. they told their children that there is a god that reward good deed and punish bad deed. it always watching you, you can pray for health, safety and prosperity, and live a good life, even humble and meek, sisnce it ensures the life at least. so if there is no real surveillance and jurisdiction, we can imagine there is one, and repeat it so much that we start to believe it. scientific researchs show that if human repeat a lie so much and see others believes that lie, it starts to believe it, like the propaganda about the value of space exploration during Cold War in the USA, which was not true but people believed.  
it can be concluded that god and religions are created and preserved since there were beneficial and useful.  
there is a lot of known gods and religions in human history. Rome, Greece, Egypt, north europe and scandinavia, Palestine, Mesopotamia and Babylon, Iran, India, China, Japan, and many other cultures and groups have some sort of religion and god or gods. there is no valid known source for these religions, but it can be assumed that someone or a group have initiated these beliefs and they spreaded gradually among people.  
one common practice for religions is that the believers invite others to their religion and typically force the children and relatives to it, so it grows just like a living form. even there is some cases that apostatize has death penalty. also some cases can kill and eliminate non-blievers to their religion or infidels.  
there were several polytheism religions like roman gods Jupiter and Apollo, greece gods like Zeus and Athena, northern gods like Odin and Thor, egyptian gods like Ra and Osiris, babylonian nad Assyrian Ishtar and Ereshkigal, hinduism gods like Brahma and Shiva, shinto gods like Amaterasu mikami and Inari kami, and so many other religions and branches and sects. someof these polytheism religions have one omnipotent god, known as god of gods or king of gods and some deitis with several duties like god of sun or god of afterlife that is sometimes called underworld. modern human genrally consider these religions obsolete and some sort of fantasy and fiction in litrature, and there is not a lot of persons that believe there were someone or a god called Zeus that had divine powers and there is no evidence that any of these gods currently exists.  
some of these polytheism religions seems to borrow form each other. the roman and greek religions are very similar. some have underworld and the god of deads. some have serpent, a god of sun, a god of war, a god of fertility or agriculture, a hero figure, an immortal figure. it seems that the ancient civilizations had a communication and there had access to each others religions and modify their reliogons with interesting stories from other religions.  
there is not a known existense as Zeus or Odin or Shiva or Inari kami, either a human or some other creature. it seems a myth, a story, a fiction. they depicted these as a human-like figures and made many statues and drawings. some statues were made from precious materials. they gradually started to worship the statues rather than the myth, since it was materialized and tangble rather that an imagination and a myth. and the became idol worshpers. such an idiots.  
one exceptional god is the supreme and unique god that still has many believers. the root of one unique omnipotent god seems back to Iran and Zarathustra (Zartosht) religion. this may be the first known monotheism religion that promotes the supreme god called "Ahura Mazda" and also defines a devil existence. it can be suspected that it was not originally monotheism, or maybe they were worshiping sun or fire instead of supreme god , and later they chose to be monotheism. it is very old and historical documents may not be completely correct and accurate.  
there is a dominant believed God that roots in Abrahamic religions. the Abraham is belived to be an ancient prophet and its religion is very old and unknown and apparently there is no remaining covenant and testaments.  
the following paragraph describe the story of Abrahamic prophets. there is many versions of stories. this paragraph tries to cover a very brief story that may be accepted by differnt religions.  
they believed that supreme God created human called Adam and then Eve, Adam's wife. put them in a good place and for a trail, told them to do anything you like except eating from one specific plant. then satan deceived them to eat from that tree and promised them immortality or omnipower by eating from that tree, and then god punished them and sent them to the earth. on the earth they had children, where one of their sons called Abel get killed by its brother Cain out of jealousy.  
there was a prophet called Nooh form offsprings of the Adam who built an ark in the mountain and saved beleivers and animal pairs form a severe flood that coused water overflow up to mountains. then from Nooh's offspring, Abraham become prophet who had two children, Isaac form its wife and Ishmael from its bondwoman. Ishmael was first son. Abraham put Ishmael and its mother in Arabia peninsula near Mecca, since its wife had no child and was jealous of bondwoman. later when they were old, Isaac was born. Isaac's son was Jacob also known as Israel, a prophet who had 12 sons from 4 wives, 3 are famous: Levi, Judas, Joseph. Joseph is 11th son. their homeland where in palestine seemingly. the bigger brothers were jealous of little Josef, so they put him in a well and a caravan took Josef to Egypt. in Egypt Joseph grew up and became some sort of authority. then took its brothers and family to Egypt. many years later Pharaoh, king of Egypt, saw a dream that one of Israel offsprings took its power, so commanded to kill all male newborns of them. mother of Moses put it in a basket and placed it in the river. Pharaoh's wife took child from river and raised it in the palace of the Pharaoh. Moses become prophet from levi offsprings. then saved its tribe from Pharaoh. then promised to bring commandments in 30 days, but it took 40 days. in the meantime, someone created a golden calf and promoted it as a god, and people started to worship it instead of the invisible god. then moses brought 10 commandments, that are basic rules for a group of people to live together peacfuly, and burned golden calf. after that levi offsprings became prists and prophets and Judas offsprings became authorities.  
David and its son Solomon where kings and prophets after Moses. solomon was an omnipotent king that used elves and other mystical creatures to extract metals from rocks and obtain pearls from the seas. Jewish religion are based on the teachings and covenants of these prophets, Moses, David, Solom and others, called Genesis and Torah. solomon created a great and wealthy kingdom.  
many years later a jewish girl called maria devoted to shrine in palestine. it gave birth to a boy without a father, called Jesus, who became a prophet and had 12 followers called 12 apostles. then Jesus executed with a cross, it is called crucifixion. jesus made a dead alive called Lazarus. Jesus and Zechariah and its son, John, all were prophets and get killed. after them there were no prophet until muhammad. many years after jesus, they collected many writing based on the Jesus preaches.  
muhammad was born in a deserted barbarian land, in Mecca. when it was 40, it claimed it is a prophet and is talking to an angel that is the messenger of the God. in 23 years it completed a book called Quran and converted most of the people in the area to Islam. after it, muslims invaded to many foreign lands and instead of killing or plundering them, they invited them to the Islam which promote equality and peace.  
above paragraphs were a brief story of the unique and supreme God and its religions. there is not a single evidence about the existence of this supreme God, yet most of the people on the earth in 2000 years ago beleived in this God.  
one major issue is that most of the people know that the idols and polytheism is myth and unreal, and it is considered primitive and obsolete and deprecated. but when it comes to the supreme God, still many people believe that it exists without any evidence. it may have 2 major reasons. one is that this believe works and helped human society in the past. the other reason is that Self yearn for unity and supremacy and domination. self is somehow a god or deity and so it is easy for it to aknowledge other exitence as god or deity.  
it is said that the first known atheist was David Hume (1711-1776). most of the people used to believe is some sort of god or supreme existences. gradually Self evolved and suspected the existence of God. in recent centuries some intellectuals told "God is dead" or "God died" but they don't mean it. since God didn't exist in the first place. there is no evidence of its existence. that's like a father who have not bought christmas gift tell its child "Santa is dead, santa was old, santa died." but santa didn't exist in the first place as the child imagine. maybe santa is based on a real person story, but the person is long gone and story is extensively manipulated.  
God was a belief for the past human to help it regulate its behavior. now Self have reached puberty. it don't need its childhood stories and fantasies. believeing in santa for an adult is not only useless, but also it is misleading and harmful. so is believing in God for modern human.  
the belief in God for modern human doesn't seem rational and beneficial and cause problems. one of the defects it causes is providing an unknown space in the mind that doesn't follow the reasoning and logic. it is like a black hole, a singularity, since God is a singularity. past people tend to throw many things in that singularity. they believed disasters, earthquakes, eclipses, plague, droughts is the wrath of God or the divine trials.  
one improtant concept that roots in the belief of God is the concept of unnatural. in the Abrahamic religions, God is a singular existence outside the nature, and it has created human, so human is alian and is not natural. it is common to consider Self as alien since it is singular and doesn't fit in any natural being category. but it may be a first of a kind, and it is naive to alienate it from nature and creating supernatural stories like Adam or Prometheus.  
if Self acknowledge itself as a result of natural evolution, it may behave more aligned with nature, and stop thinking it is supernatural or unnatural, and refrain thinking about dominating the nature or eliminating mankind to preserve the nature. it seems better for human to acknowledge Self to be a part of nature, rahter than elliminating nature or eliminating Self. this in especially important in modern era since human fill an opposition between nature and Self. it is because Self considered itself a supereme creation of divine power for millenniums. now it's time to know that those dreams are Self's childhood fantasies. human is probabily as natural as frog, dolphin, giraffe, jellyfish.  
if someone ask then what about Abrahamic prophets, it can be said that there is no scientific evidence that they were as their stories tells, and if they were existed, there is no evidence of their acclaimed God. the story of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob is very old. there is some texts from Moses era, but there is no known scripts in Egypt indicating the presence of Moses, and if it was, it also is not the proof of God. the story of solomon seems completely off-topic and fantsy compared to others. where is the treasures of the king that built a utopia with the help of supernatural beings? they are digging in Israel to find it. good luck! it can be suspected that a king wanted to be considered a super powerful wealthy yet sacred and saint and prophet, hence utilized the divine power in an effective way to stop people doubting, questioning and mistrusting the source of these stories. specially knowing that the Judas lineage had an interest in wealth while levi lineage wanted to be saints and sacreds, and the jealousy of Judas tribe to Levi tribe created a fantastic prophet, way more powerful than theirs.  
about the story of Maria and Jesus, there is also many debate even it is not that old. when a girl lives in a shrine and receive some treats and get pregnant, it is more likely to assume a pervert have feed that girl poisonous substances and had intercourse with her while girl were unconscious, or maybe have deluded her that it is a divine figure. it is also possible to think that it had an intercourse with someone intentionally, since it is natural.  
in case of making dead alive, it is common to think someone is dead, but it was alive. it is more likely to someone have weak vital sighs and rescue it.  
muhmmad never made dead alive or perform other miracles. Muhammad have done a really great job and made a barbarian group of people into a more civilized society. it seems a cunning and clever man, a genius, a prodigy. its kindness, forgiveness and mercy and introducing such God, attracted people who lived in a brutal and wild culture. for human, affection and love is more effective and attractive than violence and ferocity. someone can justify to introduce an imaginary being to civilize barbarians, just like to tell children about santa to make them behave. but at some point, children grow and find the truth and understand the reason of the santa story. it is up to children to find the truth.  
religions are solid and rigid. they are dead. they never has been alive at the first place. so they are not a good fit for living forms. they were beneficial artifacts human utilized for a long time for regulating individuals behavior. but they are not needed forever, and someday human must leave them. the necessities, circumstances and requirements of societies in 2000 years ago are not equal to the modern era. one major problem about religions is that they respect God and divine more than life, so someone may call believers "despisers of life" or "despisers of body". believers were not really despisers of body, but covering the body especially for females and prists may imply that they despise the body. believers may not depise the life but when they yearn for heaven and willingly volunteer for death, they can be called so. they prefer God and heaven over life.  
one common unknown matter for believers is that in absence of their God, their religion, their singularity, what is their purpose of life? what they must do? why they must be good if there is no after-life, judgment day, hell and heaven? the answer is clear. human must live, must do whatever wants. human must do good because it yearns for it, becuase its inner voice guide it to good. because self knows that by doing bad, it may get punished. even it can escape from people, it can't escape form itself, form its psyche and conscience.  
there is nothing sacred, saint, holy. a book or a place or a building or a stone or water can't be sacred or holy. you can't call someone holy and some other been not holy. every human is holy. life is sacred. life don't need God.  

## Country, Religion

humans in old times formed groups. groups had a legacy of collective knowledge which forms rituals and culture in a large scale. they lived with their customs and traditions and transfer them to their next generations. the legacy of common traditions formed two intertwined concepts, country and religion. these were way of life and shared values which people learn to respect and revere.  
flag is the symbol of one value system for people that live under that flag. Rome was an empire, a big country with some values. Jesus Christ created a new value system. it was preacher of some values that revered and sanctified. this new religion seemed good and people liked it. the Rome and Jewish flags start weakening, so they killed Jesus to preserve their values, but it was not effective. gradually people prefered flag of christanity over flag of Rome. conflict between two value systems prolonged until they merged into one flag and formed christian empire, when an emperor decided to stop the futile conflict, and decided to adopt christian values and fused them with Rome with some modifications.  
religion needs an order to grow and promote and manage itself, and a country need a religion and belief system for its people to obey and behave. so the combination of country and a religion can shape a community with sympathy that can relate and have social interactions. before Rome, Iran and Egypt utilized this synergy. the case of Rome is important because christanity is still have believers.  
it seems in ancient Mesopotamian and Assyrian civilizations, females of noble family had some sort of scarf or head covering. the original reason of this tradition seems not clear, but it may be guessed that covering the females in vail can be sign of two things. one reason is it shows the autority and power of noble male to ensure female exclusivity. other reason is that it indicates decency and morality, since noble females were typically beautiful, clean and with gorgeous dresses and jeserly and makeup. so showing them to ordinary people is not considered a proper trait and raise jealousy. this type of covering for female nobles was also common in other civilizations and gradually covering head and body for female become a sign of nobility and decency.  
gradually this tradition adopted in christian religious community, and female religious individuals weared covering dresses to indicate decency. it is important to recognize and acknowledge the interferences and manipulations of states and governments and political powers on religion. also the impact of previous religioins and traditions in religions are considerable. one obvious example is believing Jesus is son of God. it probabily roots in olympian or Roman mythes which gods have father and son. also believing in 12 apostles might be borrowed form 12 sons of jacob and their 12 tribes. 12 Imam in Shia seems to be another borrow from both, since it don't have credible and reliable origin.  
mecca was a stateless region when Muhammad emerged and there were no official goverment or kingdom. Muhammad was prophet for 23 years. in those years many rules come from God according to Muhammad's claim. those rules that are written and preserved in Quran have no implication of an Islamic goverment or state or order. Islam seems completely stateless religion sicne it is emerged in a stateless region and anarchy. it tells believers to contribute in wars, to donate and help poors and despirates and take care of orphans. Muslims must calculate their income and give a portion to who needs or someone that can manage a charity firm and even tells that a portion is for who manages charity firm. the only autorithy that watch over people is God according to quran. it was a distributed and voluntarily taxing system. but even with Quran in hand and watching the prophet who was an ordinary person and claim that itself, and even it is said in Quran, right after the Muhammad's death the formed an assembly and chose a successor, but successor of what? Muhammad had no authority or position or status other than being a prophet. it was neither judge nor ruler. but it has a precious legacy. it managed to prevail peace in a barbarian culture. it managed to tell them to not abuse and turture slaves, to have a limited count of wives, to wear a minimum dress specially for females, to give a portion of inhertence to females, half a male, to don't kill female newborns since they had no use in fights of barbarians. Muhammad had a great impact on life-style of a barbarian culture, and caused many improves in the human rights and health care and order in life of people, but still its preaches and teachings was far from a civilized and developed society. ancient Iran traditions and Zarathustra religion, or Rome and Greece antiquity periods seems more developed compared to Arabia after Islam.  
gradually Islam dissolved and merged with some kingdoms and countries, like Iraq and Syria, and later Iran and Ottoman, and like other religions, each kingdom adopted a proper version of religion and modified it to befit the country and culture. one noticable example is hijab and wearing of females. after muslims propagated in various regions to spread the preaches of islam, peace, equality and the belief of forgiver and merciful God, they learned some traditions from civilized world like Iran and Rome. one thing was the way of dressing and covering body. the dress of women, specially nobles and nuns was an inspiration that took and preached it as a decent dress for females, and it gradually became major part of islam. Muslims didn't wanted to come short compared to other religions and civilizations.  
the system of countries and religions resemble the diversity and natural selection in life. every country and reliogion seems like a living form which struggle to survive, propagate, grow, improve, adapt and even dominate. there were a long and massive religious war between muslims and christians called crusades. someone may argue that they believed in same God, how they killed each other. it seems God is not the only source of value, since there is many holy things beside the God, like prophets, books, lands, and also the wars is not merely for dominating the value systems, but also real and tangble valuable things like lands and wealth have an important role in these wars.  
after occurance of crusades, knight templar order, medieval inquisition and black death plague pandemic, people gradually suspected the value of their believes and the truth of Catholic Church. since the poor fellow-soldiers of solomon temple gradually became rich fellow and catholic judicial procedure acted like Jesus executers instead of Jesus, and praying for God in church infected people instead of healing them. so people doubted their beliefs and the renaissance period emerged. advancment of technology and science caused people think more rational and logical and weakened superstitions and belifs. so gradually the value and effect of religion fainted in the nations of europe.  
instead some sort of new values replaced them like nasionalism, facsism, nazism, marksism, communism. so the next wave of wars were not religious, but ideological or ethnical. after many wars like Napoleon Bonaparte wars, first World war, second world war, Yugoslav wars, gradually the value of extereme idoelogies and ethnicities and remnants of religions fainted even more. the emersion of Eroupian union is an indictor of emersion of new values, where countries, nations, ethnicities, religions are the not main values, but human rights and envirenment are the common values.  
in another part of the world, muslims still live in a medieval theme. some branch of muslims believe that if someone exits the religion and become heathen or kafir it must be killed. also they raise and make their child muslim. so this believe has no exit and is like a mafia cartel. in this matter they both like to ensure their existance even with force and fear. the problem with religions and countries is that typically people born in them and no one ask them if they agree with their values and rules or not. in modern societies it is understandbale that someone must be free to choose its believes and values, but muslim countries are far from modernity. if someone inpect countries with the majority of muslim believers, Indonesia, Malaysia, Bangladesh, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran, Azerbaijan, Turkey, Somalia, Iraq, Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, Oman, Yemen, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Sudan, Somalia, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco, Niger, Mali, Senegal, nigeria, even albania, there is an obvious obstalce that prevent them form modernity, and someome can suspect that the major problem is Islam, besides communism and nationalism and ethnical values.  
someone may ask is modernism better or traditional life. it can be said generally modernism is better since it value human and life, and is the result of evolution and improvement. believers, for example muslims, believe that gender minorities, like homosextuals must be exterminated form society either by execution or exile or prevention of declaring it or diagnosing it with transgender surgeries. if all the scientific researchs show that the homosexual individuals don't harm society and can live among people, believers don't accept it since God and prophets are no longer available and their values come from prophet, not science or logic. believers don't value lives in a modern sense. for many years they used to execute sex workers, homosexuals, infidels, profaners, witches. modern societies value human life and human rights and freedom in a modern fashion.  
most of the religions don't have commandments about nature and animals. in Europe and Middle East most of the people were believers, and they didn't preserve animals and natural lands. still believers don't pay much attention to nature since it is no sentence from God.  
development is one-way like time. the way that europians have passed is an inevitable way that others must also pass. sooner or later, muslim become obsolete like Catholic Church and people learn to respect life and human rights and environment, and don't look for answers of modern problems in ancient texts. also people will talk less about their ethnicitiess and races and people are not judged by their birthplace and race.  
freedom of belief or freedom of religion is absurd. how one must be free to believe that homosexuals must dispel from society, heretic must be executed, children must be raised believers and no one must quit the religion? what if someone create a belief or religion for nazism and worship Adolf Hitler and wants to wipe jewish and disabled and homosexual individuals from the world? Nazi seems more moderate than extereme beliefs, since they don't tell their children if you don't believe in what we say, god will burn you in hell. a muslim beliver typically don't allow its daughter to have boyfriend or go to a party or pool, force girls to have hijab and many restrictions that are not logical and rational and acceptable in a modern society. there are many cases that believers killed many people or restricted their rights not because of a justifiable reason, but merely because of God or their beliefs. one example is the Salem witchcraft trials in the 1600s where many people accused, turtured and hanged with the accusations of witchcraft. this case is related to christians were typically they are not infamous for being violent and breaching human rights. ISIS, Sepah, Basij, Al-Gaeda, Taliban, Boko Haram, Al-Shabab, Hamas, Hezbollah, Islamic Jihad, Abu sayyaf, Jemaah Islamiyah are some samples of terrorist groups which all proudly declare they are muslims and follow muhammad and kill people, yet many poeple even including non-muslims try to convince people that Islam is not a terrorism belief and there are many muslims that are against violence and terrorism. it doesn't seem a coincidence that so mnay terrorist group emerged in islamic regions. by investigating the provenance of Islam, someone can tell that the Islam emerged in a barbarian culture and tried to change that, and it was even succeeded to some extent, but it is obviously impossible that a barbarian group turn to a civilized peacful intellectual society in a short period. there were many wars after emersion of Islam beween muslims themseves. by inspection of Islam believes someone can understand that why so many terrorist group emerge in islamic societies. so it seems that freedom of belief is ok to some extent that someone don't believe that it must change the world and make a heaven on earth like Adolf Hitler or send them all to heaven like Roohollah Khomeini.  

## Minorities

one major form of reproduction method in living forms is sexuality and having 2 genders of each species, male and female. if an individual has no fertility and is not able to reproduce, it can be considered unhealthy and disordered in the context of life. if human can preserve that DNA and reproduce it artificially (in an unnatural way), it may not be considered a serious disorder. but in essence, a living form that is unable to reproduce, or do not have intent or desire to reproduce, or have desire to same sex and not opposite sex can be considered not aligned with life flow.  
now human population is way beyond earth capacity. it is not even plausible for billions of people to live a good life on earth along with other forms of life. so reproduction and preserving all people DNA is not a major concern. so from this perspective, we can accept sexual minorities in society and leave them as they are. human is not in a tight situation and low on resources and head count, and don't have an urge to reproduce. but the only aspect of sexuality is not reproduction.  
humans live is society and there is some psychological and sociological concerns like perception, social status, sympathy, understanding, specially about children. it is typical to look at sexual minorities and disabled individuals as abnormal and fill uncomfortable in their presence and communication since they are different with normal people. this discomfort can be reduced by teaching and informing individuals specially children. human may have an instinctive behavior in many situations, but it can learn and practice to change its behavior.  
in the past people used to expel, insult and despise disabled and unnatural people. even in some cases the used to go so far and kill or burn the disordered ones. what they were afraid of was to get infected and lose life. even now in some underdeveloped areas people still treat exceptional people badly. the solution to this problem is teaching and awareness. it is good to accept sexual minorities and disabled individuals in societies and provide an opportunity for them to live. it is ethical. everyone may face these problems and no one like to be removed from society or lose opportunities because of its difference. human self, mind, conscious is the important part of human, and these minorities is not lower in self, just a different in body. people must learn and get informed about the minorities like disabled and sexual minorities and other conditions like autism, ADHD and so on.  

## Death

Euthanasia is good. science have advanced and can predict the cases where someone have no expectation to live or survive. if science is certain that someone with a disease don't have any chance to survive and is suffering in the last days of its life, it is good to choose to die by its hand or by help of someone or something.  
preserving life is good, life is good and death is bad, watching someone's death is bad since psyche get used to it. causing someone's death is worse. but watching someone's suffering to death is worst. there is always hope for many people. maybe they can create artificial eyes for a blind person. but a severe developed cancer case has no possibility of survive. so wasting hospital resources and an ICU bed for a patient that will die soon in not rational, even it seems we are respecting life, but instead it is idiocy.  
suicide is bad, it is worst. all humans of all times and places know it. despair is bad and hope is good. if someone look upon life closely, will find that despair is not a trait of life. life have seen many disasters and extinctions, but it continues and now earth is full of life. every place on the planet have signs of life, even in the warmest deserts or coldest mountains some living forms can be found. human must praise life and must not fall to the pit of despair.  
if someone fill bad, fill sad, fill there is no hope and its life must come to an end, if it feels it can't change its life, its world, it can still change itself and adapt. if someone is unable to work in society that praise hard-working, it may feel uselessness, worthlessness, feel being a burden. but it must know that it is a living being. life created it for a purpose. it may not fit in its current position, but it can either change its position or itself. it is ok that someone be worthless for someone else. human is not supposed to be worthy for others, for planet, for an imaginary God. someone must be worthy for itself. someone must know that the true god, the life, loves every single living being and hate death. a living form must preserve its life and must try to adapt and find its fitting place. life is a merciful god that love all of its creatures equally and want all of them to survive and help them and support them as much as possible.  
someone may have a very hard past, full of pain, sadness, difficulty, cruelty, but past is gone. life is about present and future. someone must focus on the future and betterment. the source of sadness and happiness in within one Self. Self can choose to be happy or sad. you can try to smile and laugh now and see it is in your control, even it feels fake and artificial, but it works.  
typically the source of our sadness and failure is within us. even if someone is fat and feels sad because of its overweight, it can accept its obesity and try to accept that it is ok to be fat. the world is somehow more interesting with fat people compared to a boring world with all fit persons and there is always fat individuals in the world, and it is inevitable. but if someone knows that there is aways fat persons but it don't like to be one of them, it must know that it can overcome its situation and can reach its goal with its own will and help of others.  
most of our sufferings are from thought and beliefs of Self. Self tells that it must be reach or powerful or beautiful to be happy. but it can be happy with only its life. many people like Buddha claim that life is suffering, and suffering is a trait of life, but they have got it completely wrong. life is happiness itself and to live is to be happy. even life not ought to be balanced between happiness and sadness or suffering. life can be full of happiness and have minimal sadness and suffering, if you choose it. you can always sorrow for your died relatives, parents, for your lost child or children, for your partner you lost, for your unrequited love, for your childhood abuse, for your misfit body, for your bad place of living, for the global warming, for the death of Romeo and Juliet, or for the collapse of solar system many million years later, but you must know that someone is not supposed to live in an ideal condition. it is a disorder to think so. someone is not supposed to have parents and family, many humans have no relatives. someone is not supposed to be beautiful, healthy, strong. it is natural to lose a child, the thing that is not natural is to ruin your life for a lost child. you can forget, if you can't, you can forgive what happened to you in your childhood. you are still alive and are able to live a good life, even if that incident only happened for you and no one else. "That incident ruined my entire life, now I can't live like a normal people anymore" is a childish cheap clich for bland stories and movies.  
executing and death penalty was a common practice for old societies until recent times. now people consider death penalty a bad practice for various reasons. it seems rational to some extent. maybe executing someone who have killed many people, including females and children, and the murder is done publicly with eyewitnesses and murderer have confessed, is not that bad, since life is good and killing someone that is a killer is like eliminating plague, and is not against life. but execution is not a justifiable practice in moder era, like what they do in China, Iran or Saudi Arabia, where they even perfrom mass-executions or public executions.  
burial of dead body seems better than other types of funerals like cremation. cremation was an old tradition for extereme cases of hatred or dangerous deads. like they used to burn witches, sex workers and people who commit adultry, plagued or infected bodies and so on. in these cases burning intent was to completely annihilate the existence. there is several cases that buried body can be exhumed, to ensure the death, examine the DNA to examine relations, ensure the death cause and so on. maybe a way to recreating the dead bodies by DNA will be found in the future.  

## Mediocrity

mediocrity is good, even best. someone may argue that this statement is a contradiction, mediocrity is mediocre, best is the best. but that is the logic of Self. for life mediocrity is the best. maybe someone think that the natural selection means nature selects best, which best in this context is fittest. but fittest or best for Self and for life means different. for example best for self means strongest, but for life best means strong enough to live, strong to some extent, mediocre. because unlike Self, life is not perfectionist, it is optimist, life needs balance.  
assume an extraordinary strong male lion. this lion can dominate all other males and kill their cubs and take all females. but in this way it may reduce diversity. also maybe its female children become also very strong and don't obey males, in this way there is possibility of an unbalanced situation.  
human Self is perfectionist and yearn for the best, for the extremest condition possible, for the first rank, it yearns to stand on the highest place on a podium and get the most precious metal or medal. but for life, best is not the extremest, it is fittest, it is mediocre, it is minimum viable amount or a more.  
Self desire to be reachest, tallest, strongest, fastest, smartest, holiest, purest, best. but it don't lead to best life someone can live, even many of these extreme conditions are an obstacle to live a good life.  
money or wealth is an exchange system that help people trade their goods and time and skills. so a rich person can get whatever it wants and buy others time and skills and do whatever wants. but to live a good life someone don't need that much money. not having money cause many problems for life and can be an obstacle to live a good life. most of the people even in modern era don't have enough money to easily live a good life, buy not because of corruption or shortage of resources, but because lack of education and idiocy. if all people were educated and had a higher intellectual ability, maybe poverty were less common, and it has a looping effect since training the intellect of our children need money and intellectual parents and teachers. but Self is perfectionist and cunning, when someone is poor, self blames the poverty and promote wealth, not mediocrity.  
most animals have bodies parrallel to earth, they are aligned with nature, but human is perpendicular to nature and look upon the sky and yearn to reach the moon, the sun, the stars and look up for God in heaven. but the body is made of clay, made of earth, it is fit for living on earth. body's god is life, is earth, is sun and moon and solar system that bring life. if self desires for excelency, ascendency, trancendency, supermacy, and is not content and want to ignore and abandon mediocrity of life, it can't live a good life. Self must learn to like life and its mediocrity, and forget the heaven, since there is no God or angel or any sacred thing there, only nothingness and darkness.  
this book may seem naive and midiocre too. Self like an extraordinary book, a theory of everything, a sofisticated and complicated and elegant secret that reveals the way of happiness, the way to live a good life. the secret to live a good life is not that simple but is not that complicated too. it is not even a secret, Self is fanciful. many believed that the Self is the problem and repression of Self is the secret of happiness, some others believe otherwise, they think repression of body and instinct is the secret of happiness. the secret of a good life and happiness is that to know Self is not meant to serve itself, Self is not for Self. Self must serve body, the life. human need Self to be able to live a good life. logic, mathematics, statistics, reasoning is reqired to live a good life, but perfection, supermacy, ambition, greed, avarice and arrogance of Self is not required, though they may be beneficial to some extent if someone take control of them. Self must walk on earth with body, not fly alone.  

## Freedom

freedom is a trait and natural feature of life. animals can move and go to wherever they want and like. if an animal fall in a pit or a trap or get tangled so that it can't move, it loses its freedom, and soon it also loses its life. so freedom is essential for life, freedom to some extent. but what if someone put an animal in cage and feed it? it can live its life. it may have an urge to reproduce. then what if they provide a mate for it? males and female are not interested in all opposite sex individuals. if they were not interested in each other it is a problem. but if they find a match that both want to reproduce, it seems their life can be passed in the cage. major life requirements are food and reproduction. if an animal has been very hungry it will not be picky about food. if an animal has not seen many opposite sex individuals, it may be interested in anyone it finds. an animal in a cage with limited choice of food and mate have not a good life and is not lively, and it or its offsprings may gradually lose their lives. but what if the animal in the cage has access to a variety of foods whenever and how much it wants. also it have access to individuals of opposite sex, and it is free to choose its mate and when to reproduce. in this scenario, this animal may feel lively and be content and have a good life. cattle and sheep and pigs live like this. what this story tells is a living being needs limited freedom to be able to preserve its life and reproduce.  
human is conscious and has sense of freedom. the perception of freedom is different with freedom itself since Self is extremist and extravagant. it is meaningless to tell a kangaroo in Tasmania that it is prohibited for it to fly or swim and go out of the island. it don't go anywhere anyway. but if it was told to someone in Tasmania that can't fly or go outside the island, it feels restricted and lose the sense of freedom, even it didn't have intent to go anywhere.  
self likes and feels necessity of the ultimate freedom, acme of freedom, reaching the climax of freedom. self is not mediocre, self is sublime. if it was told to an idiot that it is not allowed to exit the solar system, that idiot tries to exit the solar system to feel freedom and liberty.  
freedom is good. freedom is necessary for life. but a mediocre freedom, freedom to some extent is enough. freedom is required for life and evolution method to preserve diversity and improvement. it is good to be free and try to achieve freedom, but someone must first concentrate on the life and required choices of life. if someone lives in a communist or fascist or theocrat or any kind of dictatorship country and region, and have limited freedom for example to choose its dress or living place or working field or ideology, it must know that perception of its freedom is not exactly correspond to the actual freedom it has. media has a huge impact on the mind, and bend reality and brainwash people. what make someone uncomfortable about freedom is typically propaganda or social pressure not its own original experiences. if in a society hijab is mandatory and someone want to choose its dress, it is bad, uncomfortable and lack of freedom. in this situation someone must think and focus on the solution. for example someone can choose its dress in private places, and try to inform people and join human right groups, or plan to immigrate. but it must concentrate on life and know that someone can live with hijab. there were groups that hijab was mandatory among them and females were forced by individuals and family rather than government, but people were not that displeased since there were no media and some activist to inform people their rights. now self know and see what people say and how people live around the world and like to choose its desired life. but maybe there was a huge gap between what Self see and want, and what it has. this gap create a sense of unhappiness and sadness.  
if Self wants a better life, freedom, power, it must earn it. God or United nations or communist party or priests or saints or shrines doesn't fulfill Self's desires for freedom and happiness. Self must utilize its powers, intelligence, logic, kindness, compassion, love, to fulfill its desires. Self is the source of problems and also possess all solutions. Self must not despise the body or life or world or God and put the burden on them and blame them because they won't fulfill Self's desires, they are not able to do so and are not supposed to do so at the first place. taking responsibility is the Self obligation. does Self want freedom? it must either be content with its mediocre freedom or strive for more. getting sad and depressed and whining and growing hatred and resentment is only ruin life and make a bad life and lead to naught.  

## Perfection

perfection is illusion. perfectionism is a disorder. there is nothing that we can call perfect in the world. perfection is a concept, is a creation of mind, Self. mind call something perfect if it thinks it is completely match to its imagination. typically mind create a model from the world utilizing senses and observing the world. also mind can create thoughts, concepts, imaginations. perfect may be defined as "complete without defects". perfect meaning is similar to complete, expect that complete means no more needed but perfect mean no more needed, no more is acceptable, exactly as expected, as planed, no more, no less. but typically when someone talk about perfection, what it thinks about is that something is perfect if it is exactly as the mind imagine it, as Self like it. in other words, perfection is exact materialization of imagination.  
what is a perfect square? it is a shape drawn with 4 lines that are the same size, and they are perpendicular to each other. so this is the definition of a square, or maybe a perfect square? do oneself can imagine a perfect square? maybe. but do exist a perfect square? it doesn't seem possible because there is no perfect drawing and measuring tools. even on an LCD or LED display a perfect square doesn't exist since displays are made from pixels and so the lines of squares are not even line but also a dotted line. but maybe someone say it is perfect because its perceived image of a square on an LCD is exactly corresponding to what it thought since there is no visible difference between lines length and angles seem upright. but what if someone look closely and detect pixels and argue that it is not even a continuous line? so is perfection relative?  
perfectionist, or looking for perfect things, wanting to have perfect things, wanting to be perfect is a disorder. it may be a hindrance for living a good life. Self must know the world is not supposed to match its imagination, to match what Self likes. a free Self in abundance and prosperity, wanders and imagine. the only resource that a mind needs to build a world, a city, a human, is time, and with enough time it may claim that it has imagined a perfect thing, a perfect Self, a perfect human, a perfect society. being able to imagine a perfect thing is very important to live a good life since life needs flow and still life will decay. life needs change, flow, movement, but not every change or movement is good. life needs good changes, moving toward betterment. life need improvement, progress, development. it is a major part of life. the evolution of living forms toward iteration and selection of better individuals is the way of life to achieve improvement. so improvement is a feature of life, maybe the most important one, so important that someone may say life is improvement, to live is to improve.  
the concept of perfect is what Self imagine of ultimate shape of life. Self tries to imagine if life continues forever, what is the shape of human then? so it tries to make evolution faster by predicting what may life want and where life may go. it seems impossible or absurd but it is not. Self have ability to understand the life system and predict and imagine what life plans for futures, what are better life forms and what are worse life forms, albeit to some extent and with error of course. not only Self can predict the direction of life flow, but also it can change it and choose it to some extent. imagination of perfection is the prediction of direction or deciding the direction for Self's life progression. lack of imagination of perfection doesn't mean one Self doesn't move, but it is more like that self move with flow without a determined target. but by imagination of perfection one self choose the direction of the flow.  
someone may argue that this is not natural and human must not manipulate the life. this is because human may consider Self unnatural or alienate it, and if one likes everything be natural, must eliminate the Self completely and let the life proceed naturally. but the problem of this way of thinking is that Self is natural itself and is  aresult of evolution. so eliminating the Self is also unnatural. so both existence and elimination of Self seems unnatural. but it is more logical to accept the existence of Self and let it live. it is not rational to be worry of life and future. it seems life appeared a very long time ago, and there were some points in history where many life forms have eliminated, but life carried on and expanded and improved. so even if human eliminate many life forms, there may be a chance that life appears again. does it differ if human extinct completely or life eliminated completely? human is the only known conscious observer of life, so it seems rational for human to think about life too seriously because life is more powerful and unpredictable. even if human eliminate most of the life forms, some millions years later there may be even more life forms, and if human preserve all life forms there may be a disaster like meteor impact and eliminate all life forms in a blink.  
so it may be considered natural and even good for human to imagine perfection and follow it. it may lead to its improvement witch is a requirement of life. but what make perfectionism an illness and prevent living a good life is that when someone wants to reach the perfection instead of moving toward it. perfection is like sun, it is beautiful and desirable, and guide us, but not reachable and touchable. perfection don't exist outside of mind, and is an illusion and is impossible. one Self is not ambitious, but arrogant and idiot if it thinks reaching perfection is possible. a perfect human, a perfect society, a perfect world, does not exist and can not exist. someone can imagine a perfect society and try to build it, but it must know that it never become as perfect as it imagine, and maybe even it find that its imagination is not that good at all.  
if someone thinks that it or its partner or its car or its house or anything is perfect, it maybe misuses the perfect word and believes that nothing is perfect so calling a nearly perfect thing perfect. but if it uses the perfect word knowing its meaning, that means its perception have problem because there is no flawless human or thing possible. so it is probably unable to observe or understand flaws.  
this book defines value as what life implies and guides to. life is good and death is bad. and what life chooses is called better. so we must not say life choose better lives, we must say better is what life chooses. so the improvement means moving toward life direction. so to live it to improve. and there is no best since life never stops at a point or maybe some day it stops, but it is unknown to us so the best is unknown too. and that impossible or unknown best is called perfect.  

## Future

human seems to be in a special period where a technological advancement called Artificial intelligence or A.I. is emerging. this can be considered as an artificial Self, which can be installed on an artificial body and called a robot, not a controllable or simple robot, but an intelligent one. is an artificial human good? is it ok to create artificial intelligence? the answer of this question seems hard to tell. is artificial human good for human, for life? it can be good or bad. it is possible that artificial intelligence helps human and life or eliminates them all. the moral of artificial intelligence is way older than its emersion. oldest known debates about it back to antiquity and Greece thinkers. but there is one consideration. can human stop or restrict advancement? advancement is inherent in life nature and also in human nature. freedom is also inherent in life and human nature. so it can be assumed that advancement and creating advanced artificial intelligence is inevitable. it can be presumed that artificial intelligence may reach the state of independence and autonomy, and can live by itself and preserve its existence. but its life and existence is of new type since all living forms are DNA-based. so do carbon-based and silicon-based life forms can co-exist? can human transfer its Self from carbon-based vessel to a silicon-based vessel? this book has still no answer for these questions.  
another important futuristic activity is the genetic transmutations. along with natural selection, human always have done artificial selection, which can also be considered as a type of natural selection in another order, since human is indeed the product of nature. human have selected many species of plants and animals, and domesticated them and even have formed some new species. it doesn't seem so bad and against life and human. now human is able to transmutate the living forms in the laboratories and at a deeper level. but advancement can't be stopped and also it can be treated like the transmutation that human have done before.  
Fear is one of main motivations that someone may like to control and restrict futuristic processes. one reason of fear is ignorance, like when people fear from darkness, it is the fear of unknown, and in the unknown there is probability of danger. but typically there are some people who their ambition overcome their fear, and also conservatives can't convince them or restrict them from their advancement. if someone imagine the best possible outcomes of these advancements, it can promote them and try to move toward that outcome instead of trying to stop it, caused by fear of worst outcomes. if human can create its ideal robotic partner, if human can be born in laboratories from chosen DNA and grow in suitable environment by human and robots, if there is a good control over environment and human population, if human can live longer and healthier, if poverty, war, superstition, believe, idiocy can be vanished, then why don't contribute to advancement?  

## Judgement day

so what if God and judgement day and heaven and hell exists? there is no evidence for existence of God, but there is also no evidence and proof that can tell God doesn't exist. so someone may always presume the existence of God.  
what if God exists? the first question about God is what this God may be? is it the supreme God that believers think about? is it Shiva or Zeus? Is it an alien with a higher order intelligence that have created DNA and have put it in earth and earth is an incubator for them to observe us like how we observe bacteria? how we know?  
human still doesn't know about God scientifically. hence it can't conform its behavior and way of life to reach the best outcome of all possibilities, whether God exists or not.  
but there is one important case where many people talk about and believe in it and that is the supreme god who will deliver us after death and judge us in judgement day and send to hell of heaven depending on our deeds. it is the main structure of the beliefs of religions. so what if this supreme God and its judgement day do really exists?  
first thing that must be answered by believers themselves is that what religion and branch is the right one? Shia? Sunni? Catholic? Presbyterian? Jewish? some of them may say believing in god and hell and heaven and doing good deeds is enough. then what is the purpose of so much detail in rules of prayers and fasting and eating and drinking?  
if someone carefully inspect all commandments of God in all religions, may say that what God really wants is for human to live a good life. God forbids alcohol, adultery, sensuality. God rewards praying, fasting, helping poor, being fair. praying is a good exercise for the conscience and psyche. fasting is a good practice for the body. alcohol is a toxic drink and damage body. so many of God's commandments are good and help live a good life.  
the problem is that some of the commandments are not useful and some of them are bad. prohibiting alcohol or gambling can be accepted. even non-believers and science agree with that. Muslims don't eat pork while eating pork is not bad. pork is one of the most common meats in the world and there is no scientific reason that eating pork is bad. along with scientific reasons, human must always pay attention to psyche and psychological effects. someone may say observing behavior of pigs affects human, specially children, so it is not bad to eat pork, but it is bad to have pigs in farms. but this is not a scientific proven claim and also the technology can help to control psychological effects.  
there are some commandments about retaliation for injuries and homicides that may be not the best of what human have found so far. blood money for all humans are same, and for females is half of males in Islam. it doesn't seem what most of the countries accept. the intense punishments for sexual behaviors and adultery is not applicable in modern era, and also pregnancy prevention tools and drugs are available and also DNA tests.  
it doesn't seem God will punish someone who has lived a good life with thinking and reason and has not harmed and harassed and offended others and environment and has revered life.  
if someone ask from people around the world that will God send a Muslim Taliban soldier to the heaven or a North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) soldier who fights for peace and human rights, it is expected to hear that most of the people may think a NATO soldier is a better person. The voice of the people is the voice of God. it is an old proverb. but The voice of the people is the voice of life, not God, since nobody knows God, nobody have talked to God, nobody have visited God. maybe that unknown God prefers the Taliban over NATO. who knows? people think of God as life.  

## One Commandment
love, preserve, respect, utilize your Self, psyche, body and life.  
this one commandment is enough to live a good life. if you love yourself, your body, your mind and accept it and use your abilities to live a good life, you can have a good life. that's the rule of life.  
don's steal. that's bad, that's not aligned with life. but steal if you need resources for your life or your children life or someone else.  
don't commit homicide. it is generally bad. but if you are a Royal Air Force pilot and some militia are killing civilians, kill those militia.  
don't lie. but if you are in a horrible society and need to lie to immigrate to a better place to live better, you can tell lies.  
psyche is watching Self, as children watching adults. don't do anything that may cause you watch yourself lowly, don't do anything that cause you hate yourself, that cause you don't respect and don't love yourself.  
it's ok to be handsome or ugly. it's ok to do cosmetic surgeries if you like, but it's ok to remain natural. you don't owe people beauty. but it's not ok to be frowning and not smile. that's not lively.  
it's ok to have a normal body, thin or chunky. but it's not ok to eat a lot and have no physical activity and become fat. it is unhealthy and wasteful. it's not lively.  
it's ok to be alone, but it's better and more lively to live with a family or partner or children. psyche is like a child and is happy with children around, but become sad and depressed without children or alone.  
alcohol, cigarette, drug and any substance that directly affect brain and psyche are not good and lively. but if the circumstances of life necessitate using them, and someone can't tolerate live without them, it's ok to use them as a medicine, not food. it's not ok to use them always or casually, and someone must cure itself with these medicines and fix the problems to be able to live without stimulants. it is not ok or lively to always use stimulant substances.  
it is ok to obey the rules or not. someone must live without its values and its inner guide and fulfill its life guidance and reason. but must not be an idiot and must think and use its mind to live a good life, and if violating the rules cause punishments and problems, someone must change his society or position or try to change the rules. if there is no other choices, someone must obey the law until it can find a way to live like it likes.  
it is not possible to compile a rule book to teach living a good life and give it to all humans of places and times. parents, family, teacher, society, religion, philosopher, no one can tell someone what to do to live a good life, how to live a good life. happiness and content is within someone.  
one society may promote the wealth to be successful and happy. this society promote ambition but genetically a proportion of society is ambitious intrinsically. majority are conservative and contented. living a humble and meek life is ok if someone is happy and content with it. society may promote working. not all people are hardworking and also not all people need hardworking. it is ok for someone to work enough to live a happy and content life.  
society may promote living with family and relatives. living together is good and lively, people can protect and support each other. but it's ok to live alone, specially in modern society where someone can live alone safely. it may not seem lively, but it is ok if someone is happy and content that way.  

## Rule

the only unity that this book introduces is the one Self. the only guide that this book acknowledge is Self's will. someone may argue that it leads to selfishness, hubris, pride, arrogance and anarchy, but this is a naive approach. law, ethics, morals are indeed for benefit of oneself. it is obvious that convention is a useful invention for human, but the problem with rules is that there were many bad rules in the past societies and even now a limited regions and nations have good rules that are aligned with human and life. still many nations and countries don't have the best set of rules that help human live a good life along with other living beings. that is because this book suggest to thinking and finding a good way to live, rather than obedience of rules and religions.  
someone may like unity, one rule for all, all humans, around the world. but unity is unreal. all people only unite in death. at best, it is duality, where some people are in a utopia with high walls and many people live outside or in the best case, there is a world-wide utopia with a jail with high walls and someone may consider it unity and not duality, ignoring the outliers and misfits.  
diversity is essential for nature and life. one-for-all approach seems impossible and may lead to death if it persists, like the history of dictators. human must beware that Self have tendency to perfection and unity. but it seems dangerous because Self is hosted in body. if someday Self became independent of body and can exist without life, for example mount itself on robots and became immortal, then it can think about unity, mount all Selves on the same robotic body and force united rules and ethics on all, and all lives be the same, and live the same life. while Self is carried in body, it must look for its vessel and control its tendency to perfection and unity, and must know that life depends on diversity and evolution and must accept it. evolution is change in the context of life. every change can't be called evolution. evolution is adjustment, adaptation, and betterment for life. so rules or ethics can't be fixed and universal, and must evolve. it must vary between places and time periods and groups or even individuals.  
human can't live alone. one human soon die since can't reproduce. even a couple can't survive a long time. human need to live with other humans to survive and grow. therefore, most humans live in communitites and have social interactions. some animals also live in gropus and communities, but they have minimal interactions and live by instinct. human social interactions are commiunication of Selves and not based on instinct. Self is very flexible and seems clean when human born, and only interact with body instincs and psyche. Self can learn, can be trained, and change based on environment and its will. typically Self is formed by parents and family and society until puberty and maturity. meantime self gradually think and start changing itself willingly. many humans don't think so much and don't shape their Selves until death. it was common in old ages. nowdays it is more common for one Self to shape itself even in younger ages and choose its values and shape its character. Self even can manipulate instincts and psyche gradually to some extent. shaping and manipulating in this context means cahnging and defining its concepts like values (good and bad, liking), rules and goals.  
one common rule that seems universal between all humans of all times and places, and even it can be seen in animals and communists is ownership or possession. if someone has a banana in its hand or possession, it can eat it, throw it away, trade it with another thing or give it to anyone likes. it is somehow similar for a monkey or a communist. if someone wants a banana, it must try to obtain it from nature, or buy it from someone else with money or something else, or work for it or beg for it. humans live with the ownership rule and also know that it is common and not specific to a particular person or group. so humans expect that others also live with ownership rule.  
rules must be obeyed and need an action for when they are not obeyed. if there is no action or ability to prevention, it is not called rule, it is advice or preach or United Nations condemn. if someone violates the ownership rule by stealing, fraudulency, piracy, or many other forms of violation of ownership, who has lost his possession can take action to punish the guilty. but what if someone want to steal or violate the rule? it must know that this is not a good action, and it can face its consiquences and punshment.  
human apply some rules to society and call them law. also groups of people are involed to observe and investigate the execution and violation of rules and judge and punish the guilty.  
some other rules are not in the form of law, but are in form of ethics and morals. there is no institutions to take care of implementation of ethics, but ethics are rules and have punishment for violation. community compel ethics and punish its violation. to tell the truth is ethical and lier face consequences. truthful people expect truth and if they find someone lies, they don't trust lier, and maybe they don't even want to deal with them and avoid them.  
Self should follow its will and rules, but also should recognize the law and ethics of its society. in modern society there is many laws and ethics, for daily life and for specific gropus and places. many society rules are based on previous experiences and scietific investigations. someone must not naively ignore or disobey the rules, law, ethics, morals, unless knows its origin, its reason, and consequuenses of disobiyng it. living a good life is tighly bound to the society, and its rules, law, ethics, morals. someone may live in a dictatorship society where freedom is limited, like freedom of acceess to knowledge. it is not easy to live a good life in such society. so someone must think and find a way to escape from this scocity or get access to knowledge, and if it can't leave that society, use his mind to not support the dictator and support its extermination.  
there is many cases of bad rules, in all forms of law and government, ethics and morals of a society, or comandments of religions. these bad rules caused many deathes and bad lives for many humans. in modern age some advanced countries in europe have reached to a set of good rules, in form of law and ethics, that someone can live a good life in their society. this is a good exemplar case for people around the wold to know that how a set of rules can help a society to live a good life together. people around the world may follow them and take them as role model.  
human Self is powerful. one Self can live a good life even in a bad society. it is not easy but utilizing mind and thinking and striving, can lead to control social impact, know and filter media propaganda and live a good life and improve gradually. someone must know that life is improving and bad gradually eliminates and good survives. someone must believe in life and have hope. how can live a good life wihtout hope? hope is essential for life.  

## Heresy

it is believed that the greatest sin is heresy. heresy means denial, denial of god. the greatest sin is despair. despair is heresy, is disbelieving god, life, human, self, is denial of hope, denial of future, improvement.  
denial is the greatest sin. it is lying, concealing the truth. Self must not conceal the truth and reality. when one Self deny something and lie about something to itself, it creates a problem to be faced, it creates a hole to be fallen in it, it creates a darkness to be feared.  
life is like building a house. if you deny a problem on the ground, you may gradually face it, make a never ending effort to hold it up, and your house eventually collapses. Self must perceive and accept the reality to help human live in the world. human can not live in imaginations or expectations of Self.  
to live a good life, you need to build your Self, your psyche, your body, but you can not build it correctly on the lies and denials. you should understand and accept the reality, about yourself and the world.  
the reason of denial may be originally from one Self or from society and the others. assume one adult likes young individuals that are not still adult. in this case someone may try to deny its need and liking, and bend the reality. the reason is obvious. someone don't like to be judged and don't like to be lewd, corrupted, bad, and on top of them it has prosecution and punishment. but the denial and lying is not a good way to deal with it. it is covering the problem, not solving the problem. its analogy is someone must find the cause of pain, not cover the pain with tranquilizer. every pain is an indicator of a problem, and if someone is aware of the reason, now it may use tranquilizer safely.  
it is norm and rule to avoid having sexual relation with individuals younger than 18 years old. if someone likes it, it is because its forefathers have married in younger ages for millennials and their behaviors and desires is in human DNA. body of a human is typically ready to reproduce earlier than 18 years. on the other hand, there is some reason behind the rule of minimum age for having sexual relations. human have a long lifespan and need a long time to develop its brain, Self, mind, and need education to be able to live a good life and be able to make right decisions.  
awareness is a powerful aspect of Self that can be used instead and against denial. when Self become aware of itself or its psyche or its body, it can try to find a way to control it. without awareness, human behave with instinct. when someone become aware that it has sexual interest and desire in younger individuals, and acknowledge it, and also it is aware of rules and the fact that this desire is not good, it can try to control or compensate this desire. Self is problem solver and can find a way to meet its desire, if it can't ignore it. for example looking for individuals that look younger, or use other methods.  
assume a child has a condition that makes it outlier and odd, and other children make fun of it. parents can try to find a place where that child is safe and no one mock it. even they can prevent child from going to school or public places. but it is denial and doesn't solve the problem. someone should know that it may be odd and mocked by others, but it can live with it and nobody dies by getting mocked. someone should know that its value is not determined by others and if others don't value it, it doesn't mean it is valueless. teaching children and raising their awareness to avoid mocking minorities and exceptional individuals is as important as teaching individuals to be able to tolerate negative opinions and even negative behaviors of the others. human can not control the behavior of others, so should be able to tolerate them.  
it is common for self to deny its weaknesses and problems and tell itself that it is strong and perfect. Self think of it as a solution to weaknesses and problems. but it is covering problems not solving them. if someone have a condition that it regard it as a problem, the first step is to be aware of it and acknowledge it. how someone can solve a problem if it doesn't acknowledge it as a problem? then it must become aware of the origin of the problem. is it identify as problem by Self or by society? if it is problem in Self's opinion, why Self think so? can it change its opinion? if it is solvable, it is problem, otherwise it is fact.  
if someone think its body is weak, and identify it as a problem, it can solve it by exercising. if someone think its body is short, it must identify it as a fact, not a problem. Self must be realistic. someone can look taller by standing straight and using special shoes, or by living in a society where people are shorter. it is better than denial and convincing Self that there is no problem, but in depth of psyche feel suffering from this fact or problem.  
in the case where one don't have a problem with something but think society have problem with it, solving problem may be easier. if someone likes a style that is considered weird or peculiar in public opinion, it may be a problem that someone should not deny, and should try to become aware of it. it is good to be able to tolerate opinions of others, but it is better to be aware of the reason of their opinion, and why they think someone is weird. it is good to know about the mutual impact of appearance on psyche and psyche on appearance, and the origin of norms and judgements of the people. after knowing these, someone may decide that its appearance is proper and match its character and there is no reason to deny or hide its character, or maybe there is something wrong and there is an offense or disorder about its appearance that can be solved.  
to live a good life someone should not be heretic and should avoid denial, and confess and acknowledge the problems and become aware and then think and look for the solution or acceptance.  

## Conclusion

Life is good. this statement doesn't describe the life. it defines the good. life is trivial and self-explanatory, while good may be vague and ambiguous. someone may say that good is also trivial, everyone knows what is good and what is bad. it is build-in. it is true to some extent. the problem is that human is not a monolithic and united existence. it has a conscious Self, which lives in body, but it feels alien to it. and the body instincts and Self both have their values and desires. so Self must acknowledge and respect the life and its values since it can't exist without it (yet). also Self is whimsical and mutable and variant, and it may experience extensive changes in its journey inside body.  
Self may say Self is good, human is good, but it knows that it will not be without life, body, animals, plants, air, water, soil, earth, sun, moon. what one self will do alone without body and life? what Self wish for beside immortality? but what Self will do with its immortality? sit and watch? forever? maybe immortality is also not only for Self but also for body, for life, since immortality is more useful for life, and it also ensures the immortality of Self.  
Self or human is unique and humans are similar, and all are belong to one species, probably. that may arise a concept of unity and a tendency to form a united nation. but when someone inspect this unity carefully it doesn't seem so interesting and beautiful, and diversity seems more lively and delightful.  
this book presents neither selfishness and individualism nor socialism and unification and monotheism. this book presents neither repression of Self, nor restriction or denial of the instincts. this book presents the intellect and thinking and reasoning and abominate idiocy. this book presents the authenticity of individual over society, because Self is individual with its values, not a society. awareness have authenticity over one individual, and think and live as one individual, and thinking as a group or society and meeting needs and desires of a group is indeed artificial and fake. also this book presents a very import consideration and that is someone must be aligned with others, family, society, rules, environment and life since it is rational and beneficial for one Self.  
finally this book represents that Self must be aligned and take care of life, not itself, since it is nothing and has no value by itself, probably.  

## Epilogue

this book is to tell you how to live a good life. but some people, maybe the ambitious ones or perfectionists may ask how to live the best life?  
it seems not that complicated. if human try to be as good as possible and try to avoid bad as possible, it leads to the best life someone can live.  
people like to live successful, rich, famous, hero, champion, family man, actor, doctor, scientist, leader, engineer, entrepreneur, billionaire, president, king, saint, prophet. but who want to live god?  
god is better than any other. god id the best. why one don't want to live god? not the omnipotent god, not the uncreated and everlasting god, not the creator, preserver, destroyer god, not a tyrant, oppressor, slave driver god.  
not even a righteous and just god. righteousness and justice is good not the best. god is more! god is kind, wise, generous, forgiver and merciful. god is collection of all good and void from all bad. god sits and watch and don't interfere! god loves all, even the bad ones, either punish them or forgive them. how is it possible god create something bad, something that don't like it? someone must aim high, highest, to reach its highest and what is higher than god?  
the world is full of creatures, where is the creator? where is the god? be the god!